Hi Tushaar,
 
Here are my thoughts, based on my experience of going through grad school applications for admission decisions. In general, the best SOPs are the ones that help the committee get what they look for in an SOP - what is your background, what is your interest, what is your accomplishment - effectively and efficiently.  
 
1. I like the thought you have put into the technical aspects of the problem you want to study. The challenge, though, is that it is hard for a person outside the area of research to assess whether these are important problems. And grad school admissions are generally decided by a selection committee that has a high chance of not having someone with the right expertise. So my suggestion would be to distill the technical aspects of your intended research to about 2 paragraphs - one on the background and relevance and one on what you want to do.
2. The SOP is one opportunity to paint a picture of who you are as a person, which includes things like what motivates you, why you want to do a PhD, etc. Your SOP reads like a research proposal on what you want to do. Although having some details on what you want to work on definitely strengthens your application, I'd add more details on these types of details. There are many different ways you could go about this, and there are generally no right or wrong answers here. A little more thought on this would strengthen your SOP.
3. You have an entire page of projects that you worked on, but the description of the work always seems to be: 'We did this, we found this'. This makes me assume these were group projects and raises the question of what your specific contributions to these projects were. I'd strongly recommend making this clearer.
 
Some minor points:
- There are too many references. As I mentioned before it is very likely that your SOP is reviewed by someone who isn't from your subject area. So these do not help in any way. The only references worth including are the ones you are an author on
- The SOP is too long. A page and a half is the sweet spot. Remember, the committee goes over 100s of applications. Having information that doesn't address the things I mentioned at the top but increases the length of the SOP is not viewed favorably.
 
I am guessing you already know this, but it is worth repeating - SOP is only a part of the evaluation. Your letters play a very crucial role. I hope you have already contacted the professors that you mention in the SOP. Having someone who will be looking for your application is the easiest (and in many cases only) way to make sure the appropriate expert is evaluating you. So I'd strongly recommend that. Let me know if you have questions about this.
 
Hope this helps and I'm happy to answer any other questions.
Best of luck,
Sankar